Okay, good.
That's what I was You're a yes.
Yeah, I'm a yes. All right,
now I'm done. That's fine. You can
Do anything. Excellent. Right. Okay. We're
done. Right. Okay, good. Okay.
Okay. Over to you though.
Do any intro comments and then we will have, I'm sure,
have plenty of questions. So,
Yeah. Wonderful.
Ah, can I just say, Paula,
so good to see you again.
Um, Koto, um,
uh, so lovely to be here.
Um, I don't know if any of you know,
we've got a new chief executive, uh, Nicole,
which we are very excited about.
Nicole, how long have you been on job now? I can't remember.
About three months. Three months?
It feels like three years for me,
but no, it's been, it's been
so much fun. Yeah, it does. Yeah. Yeah.
Trust me Than that. Welcome.
This is Nichol's debut, um,
at select committee, so Oh, well, welcome.
It's gonna be fun. It's gonna be lots of fun.
Um, great
to have the opportunity to be in front of the committee.
We always enjoy the interactions and the session.
Um, just a couple of things.
I think firstly, this is a review of performance.
We are in a blackout period around our financial, it's,
it's just the way the dates work that we're in blackouts,
so we can't sort of say anything that's sensitive
to the market because we are in that blackout.
We will be releasing our half year financial results
next week, Richard.
So, um, when that happens, we'll be able
to talk more freely,
but right now we are very constrained in terms
of making any public comments
around our financial performance.
We can comment on what is in the public,
and there is a little bit there,
so there are things we can discuss.
So that's just kind of, just
to let you know that just the future
Reference mean with the electricity companies.
We have them a little bit later.
We don't do the time of the Yes.
Review, because they're half failure report.
That's right. Maybe we might think about whether we
Do that. I think that would be great,
Mr.
Chairman, if we could do that, because, um, it just,
we're always gonna be a little cautious what we say.
It's not because we want to withhold, it's just
because we have obligations.
So that would be good.
Um, look, some of what I'm about
to say will be stating the obvious for some of you,
but it's just an important sort of grounding moment
to just say, in New Zealand's purpose is
to connect New Zealanders with each other in the world.
Now, that seems really obvious,
but it becomes increasingly important in difficult times
and volatile times.
And COVID was a really good example of that.
We are the only airline that wakes up every day
and thinks, how does someone get from
Invercargill to New York?
So, um, there are no other airlines in the world
that take those same views as us.
Um, and from a, like, from a New Zealand Inc perspective,
which is something that I think about a lot,
and we think about a lot as a company.
You know, we have a really significant workforce
of almost 12,000 people.
We pay about a billion dollars in tax
and dividends, which is mostly into New Zealand
and into New Zealanders.
And, you know, we are enabling around 26 billion,
which is a really, uh, of tourism, um, revenue.
And it, and, and really that translates
to being quite a significant contributor
to New Zealand's overall GDP.
There are some, I think, uh, the couple
of things I'd just like to say, just, which might set up
for some of the questions,
I'm sure you've all got your own thoughts,
but there are some highlights and lowlights at the moment,
and I think they're just contextual for where we are at.
And Nick and I happy to dive into any of them.
I think just starting on the positive,
the US market into New Zealand is in great shape,
and we are seeing, you know, those, those numbers coming
through so strongly and that's, that's so good to see
because, um, uh, it's such an important part
of our international market.
And it also is bringing people into New Zealand to go
and spend money and create economic activity in New Zealand.
The other thing which I know is of interest
to many people is our on time performance,
our reliability is an airline.
Um, and Nichol's been in the job for three months,
and it's one of the areas that we agreed as a board
with nickel that he would focus on,
and he is focusing on it.
And, and it was a focus prior to that.
In the last year, we have seen a significant uplift in our
performance from an operational perspective.
I think we are sitting at number two in Asia Pacific.
Is that right? Um, across all airlines
for our operational reliability,
that doesn't mean every flight
that you catch will be perfect,
because there are a lot of things.
And one of the points I would make around that is
that weather patterns, regardless of
how efficiently we run the airline,
weather patterns are increasingly volatile.
And so uncontrollable cancellations
and delays are certainly, um, a challenge for us.
We've got new planes, we've got new products,
we've got a lot of new planes coming at us actually
in the next couple of years.
And, um, Nichol's definitely gonna be spending a little bit
of money on making sure we've got a really fit
for purpose future fleet.
So it's kind of exciting to know that our products are kind
of, um, becoming, uh, market leading
and, um, you, you'll be excited to see those roll out.
The challenges you are very aware of.
In terms of the engines, we've talked a lot about that.
We talked about a select committee last year.
I would say that it is, uh, it's slowly improving,
but we've still got quite a long tail on it and, and,
and it, and it will come down over time.
The other thing that we are really struggling
with from a lowlight perspective
is the aeronautical costs in the system.
It continues to make life very difficult.
Um, and it's outstripping inflation,
it's outstripping everything else.
And so that is a struggle for us as a company.
Uh, we have a dilemma
because New Zealanders, you know, we don't wanna pass all
of that onto New Zealanders.
And in many cases, new Zealanders, you know, um, there's a,
there's a level where New Zealanders can, can cope to,
and so we absorb a lot of cost and don't pass it on.
And it's increasingly difficult,
particularly the New Zealand air nautical system, um, is,
is is very challenging in that regard.
And we can dive into that if you wish to.
Um, so we are controlling what we can control,
but there are many uncontrollables in this business.
It's a complex business and a complex industry.
Um, just to put it in context, today, as a normal day,
I'd say we will be flying between four
and 500 flights, be that Christchurch, be that,
be that New York, be that wherever we will be
flying four to 500 flights.
And if you think about the operational complexity of that,
it is very significant.
And we are doing that day after day after day.
And when you get a disrupt, like the weather in Wellington
and other parts of the country over the last few days,
you imagine the dominoes of trying
to recover from something like that, uh,
is pretty, pretty significant.
But we do a, we do a pretty good job in the scheme of all of
that, and there's a lot of improvements in
that regard we can talk about too.
So that's the kind of environment
that we're operating in right now.
Um, we're feeling very positive irrespective
of the challenges about the long-term view
of our New Zealand and we, how, where we are heading.
But um, we do need to keep working
with folk in the aeronautical system
to make sure we can continue
to deliver the services in the way that we wish
to on New Zealanders.
And that's all. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Il,
Did you wanna say anything?
Uh, I think no. Okay, cool. Right, go straight to questions.
Tangi. Uh, thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you. James, raise.
Sure. Michael, welcome to Thank you Select committee.
Um, James Race.
You've previously sort of indicated
that there's no intention to, to change, uh, connection
to the 20 domestic ports mm-hmm.
That we have. Mm-hmm.
Regional connectivity is an issue that many
of us hear about all the time.
Yep. LV into that. Yes.
Um, nickel, you've talked about the possibility of, um,
situational subsidies around, uh, perhaps the longevity of,
of some regional routes.
But first question is, what's happening in
that particular space?
Has that thinking crystallized, um,
and have conversations taken place in
around what that might look
Like? I might just take
that one from a strategy perspective.
So, I mean, I think I did say that I have said that,
and I say it again today, that we have 20 domestic ports,
both regional and main, um, city centers in New Zealand
that we've flown to for some time and we fly to today.
We don't have any current plans to change that challenge.
As I said in my opening comments, it is challenging flying
at the moment and to go, this is not,
this is publicly available information,
but for our, our first half of this financial year, we go,
we are guiding the market to make a loss of somewhere
between 30 and $55 million.
That's a lot of money. So that's where we are today.
Having said that, going back to what I said about purpose,
we know that's our job.
We are, uh, working with all 20 ports at the moment to,
in New Zealand to try
and make them as efficient as possible.
And we've had some really great success with that
because we've seen a,
and I won't get these numbers quite right,
but if you think about a number of
around 72% say the 82% had a 10% increase
in our reliability in the last 12 months across New Zealand,
which is quite significant.
Um, uh, the international kind of global standard, um,
someone helped me from the team be about
Top five in the world Yeah.
Would be 83%,
83%. So
we kind of, we are getting pretty close.
So that's our focus
with the regions at the moment is actually on
how we are operating and our efficiency.
That is the thing. The issues that you raise
that have been mentioned previously, I think, um,
nickel was in his first week.
He was musing about all sorts of things,
but the board nickel
and the board have never had a
conversation around subsidies.
Okay. Um, Carlos,
I thank you for coming today.
I would like to understand why
domestic air fair in New Zealand are more expensive, um,
international air freight
and explain the reason for this pricing difference.
You know, additionally, what is the air freight cost per
seat per kilometers for domestic freight compared
to international freights?
Um, Do you want me to
Yeah, maybe. Well,
I don't know the answer to the Fred question.
The, the average, um, we, we can follow up with
that particular point,
but I think if you just go to the, the heart of your issue
around, um, international versus domestic airfares,
I mean the, the different cost structures firstly,
and so we mentioned
before the aeronautical system in New Zealand
that is putting a lot of pressure on us and costs and
therefore airfares.
Um, yeah, feel free, Richard, to jump
In if I just at, at a, the smaller the aircraft
and the shorter the stage length flow in Yeah,
The higher Seat cost.
Um, so you can't compare a Wellington Gisborne, uh, sort of,
we can compare it, but a Gisborne
to Wellington seat kilometer cost, for instance, is going
to be much higher than a Auckland Los Angeles seat cost.
It's a, it's a scale economies, uh, question is the first,
uh, sort of answer to the first part of the question.
Um, and so where we've got bigger jets operating in bigger
markets, you get more scale
and with that scale you get lower pricing.
And
Maybe Carlos's good to see you.
Uh, we went to university together, uh, ah,
Ah, there we go.
It's always a connection in New Zealand.
So, uh, Was he good?
What goes on tour that there, uh,
maybe worth calling out
CPIs since pre COVID?
So from 2019 today has been about 29% percent.
Uh, and our domestic fair increase has been about 32%.
So a couple of percentage points over CPI, the cost
that we incur, um, particularly in the domestic
network has grown about 40%.
So one of the things we haven't done
and our financial performance sort of reflects that,
is passed those costs on fully to the end customer.
Um, and that that's a sort
of more structural challenge that we're working through.
But as Richard says, economies
of scale matter a lot in aviation.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so the larger
aircraft typically tend to be more efficient.
It does feel, uh, we understand it feels counterintuitive,
but there's, there's more cost per seat,
the smaller aircraft and shorter the road
as, as Richard said,
Yes, because, uh, there's some research on this matter.
Mm-hmm. We can see that the,
the cost per c per kilometers in New Zealand are almost
double compared to other country.
So this is why I want to know how you guys can address that
because they're actually causing a lot of issues,
um, for new cylinders.
Um, We would love to see that data
Is, Yeah.
I mean, if you take a, if you took a flight in Australia
between Sydney and Melbourne versus say Auckland
and Wellington as an example,
I think you'll find we're very cost competitive.
Um, and it depends on what country
or what jurisdiction you're talking about.
There are different, you know, there are different sort of,
um, characteristics of each country and,
and the roles that airlines play and those things.
But, you know, we are a, um,
we are a dispersed geographical location
and, um, uh, our cost when we compare them with some
of those countries such as Australia,
are actually very cost competitive.
Yes. I think just to elaborate on that, um, and,
and it will depend on what country you are sort
of making comparison to,
but obviously that's scale four is relevant.
So if you're comparing ourselves to the United States
or Europe, Australia for that matter, you've got much
denser markets typically with bigger airplanes,
with lower c kilometer cost.
So it's sort of, it reflects our situation.
Do you think a lack of competition is one
of the reason why our, our domestic area is so high?
Like, or what benchmark does the board use
to assess whether the the airline domestic costs, um,
base is being managed with, um, discipline, um,
than than competition would otherwise provide? Speak
To, i I, I would like to start on this one if I can,
because you asked how the board understands that.
Well, the board is subject
to detailed financial analysis about
the costs on each route,
the margin on each route, et cetera.
And, um, those cost structures are under pressure,
as I've mentioned a couple of times.
Um, and so when you talk about lack of competition,
we don't see any lack of competition except in the areas
of the country where it is really costly to fly.
You know, you've seen Jetstar withdrawal from the regions in
the past because I've said it's just too
expensive to fly here.
We continue to do it irrespective of the economics.
But when you talk about the main trunk,
we call it the main trunk down New Zealand, welling
and Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin, Queenstown, those,
those routes, uh, we are subject
to more competition than we've ever had.
Uh, we are competing
quite fiercely in those areas
and it is impacting, um, a lot of, to do
with the economics of the domestic business.
And, and that's just reality. That's life, right?
It's competition. But we are fiercely competing
internationally and domestically, regionally, the economics,
um, are challenging.
And so you end up with very few competitors
because of that very fact.
But we continue, because our purpose is at the beginning
is to connect New Zealanders.
I'll just take one quick step off that,
and then I've go to Simon the supper.
Is that, that I think Carlos was talking about seat
passenger seat kilometers cost.
So one of the things is that I don't think there's a single
one of the major routes that I've seen.
Certainly the analysis I've seen
where it's back at pre COVID levels in terms of, um,
occupancy, um, or passenger numbers.
Yes. Um, so I'm assuming
that if you've got the passenger numbers up over time,
that would significantly drop the cost per seat kilometer.
Look, we are gonna see, we're gonna see capacity come back
as the aircraft and the engines, you know, come back.
We're already seeing a little bit of that.
And that is, there is a, uh,
some truth in what you're saying.
The, the, the other side
of it though is the increasing annual year on year
aeronautical costs in New Zealand,
which we are unable to manage.
So they are, they're presented to us, so, so yes.
And maybe not, depending on how those things play out, I'm
Gonna come back to those costs, but that's not a question.
So I'll go to Simon. Mm-hmm.
Thanks. Um, I'm interested in diving in a bit some
of the operational cost drivers.
Um, how much would Air New Zealand spend
on jet fuel every year,
But, uh, 1.7 billion,
1.8 billion sort of current pricing and exchange rates.
Okay. And then thinking about Air New Zealand's
commitment shift to 10% sustainable aviation fuel by 2030,
how much is that expected to add to the cost
of purchasing fuel?
Sorry, was that saf? How, Hows to
The cost? Yeah, I think it
SAF is the acronym I understand from your
report that's sustainable. Yeah.
Aviation. Carrie, did you want
to jump in at all, or Rachel? Yeah.
Um, thanks to the question, we are working really hard to,
um, mitigate, um, the cost of self.
So safs important, it's the only lead we have
to decarbonize, but it's not at any cost.
So as much as we can, we try to get that, uh, prices close
to parity to get fuel as possible.
So we buy it at a market that subsidized, for example,
the us and then of course we look to sell it to sell, um,
the credits of SAF to usually large overseas companies
who are buying it for their own decarbonization targets.
And so that's our approach.
Okay. And so, so I mean just, uh, just having a quick,
quick look at the price differential.
Understand that that type of, it was typically two
to five times more expensive than regular.
You're right. Jet fuel.
Yes. So are you suggesting that for 10% of your total
fuel consumption, you're prepared to accept that
that will cost five times as much, two to five times as much
as you could just buy gas from?
Yeah, I, I understand. Thank you for the clarification.
And we're not at 10% no.
It's an Ambition. It's an ambition.
But the reason, Simon, just to fill in a gap,
like if you just look at it on a cost basis, you can say,
well, actually jet fuel's much cheaper.
Let's just keep with that and not worry about saf.
That's if you're just taking a financial view mm-hmm.
To take a sustainability view, you'd probably say, let's do
as much safe as we possibly can
and let's do, um, less, less jet fuel.
Of course, we think about both of those things,
but increasingly the more important thing is
that internationally we're flying to all these global ports
that are giving us a, uh, uh,
I'll get the language wrong here,
but the man a mandate within their jurisdiction
that we have to fly.
If we're gonna fly into that port,
we have to have so much saf.
So actually that is one of the key drivers
to our SAF strategy as well as the cost
and sustainability factors.
Mm-hmm. Which ports are they?
So, oh, lots of them.
Um, Singapore, Singapore was one
of the first Singapore, all of
Europe, all of the uk we don't fly there,
but in terms of where we fly, um,
Japan will have a 10% mandate by 2030.
Vancouver, uh, Taipei, Hong Kong, Korea,
nearly everywhere we fly, we are expecting Australia
to announce a mandate in 2026.
So some of that 10% we've meet through mandated or, um,
Across of doing Business effect to thought.
And then the rest that we would do voluntarily are
approaches that we need to be able to commercialize that
and pay for that to mitigate
the constant impact on customers.
And probably just in closing on that point, Simon,
our expectation of the current differential between jet
and C is, you know, sort of anywhere
between three and five times.
The expectation over time, whether it's by 2030
or not, is that that gap will reduce,
is the, is the industry,
There's a lot of stuff just to mature, a lot
of market being developed as there internationally. Yeah.
There's a lot to happen. Yeah.
Thank sue. Good, thank you.
Um, my first question is also related to,
um, the, well, it's different question,
but there's a connection, um, the climate model
and the risk from, um, increased turbulence, um,
storms damage and it's cancellations
or re bookings and the costs.
Mm-hmm. Are you comfortable with the level of risk
that you have assessed at the moment?
So, um, and where's It going?
Yeah, no, I'll make one open comment and I'll like nickel
and, and, and Kerry perhaps to make a comment.
Um, I think the first thing is that, um, in terms
of the level of risk, we don't ever take a risk in terms,
do you know, in terms of flying, the level of risk is
a very, um, carefully managed thing
that's at industry level standards and health
and safety comes number one, we don't care what's going on.
If we shouldn't fly, we won't fly.
That's kind of the, the first point,
which we are really clear about.
You're absolutely right.
And, and it concurs with what I said at the beginning,
you know, the pilots are seeing more volatile weather
patterns, we are seeing more weather days.
Um, and I think Nicole, we have a few good examples of that
and how it's impacting the business.
So kind of that's the first Yes, exactly.
And that's the first thing I think
in terms of climate modeling.
Um, Kerry can give a bit more detail,
but Nicole, do you wanna just elaborate on that?
Yeah, uh, I, I think what, at a more fundamental level,
we think one of our strategic differentiators going forward,
and we are already seeing that,
is moving from reliability alone to resiliency, the ability
to operate in challenging conditions safely.
Um, we've invested a lot of, uh, time and effort
and money in building new capability in that space.
So one of the reasons when we have the weather impacts
that we saw over the weekend
and into Monday in Wellington gets dealt with as quickly
as it does, is because behind the scenes,
our teams now have a lot more tools to reset the network to,
you know, rea accommodate passengers
and, and so on and so forth.
So it's a new muscle that we've been investing in, purely
because we are starting to see, um, a lot more,
uh, weather related, uh, challenges.
So in the last three months of the,
of the calendar year last year, so our second quarter
of the financial year, uh, we saw more high winds, two
and a half times, almost more high winds than the
last 10 year average.
Um, and, and so it's just the reality
of the operating environment we're dealing with.
And, and the way we are thinking about that is, you know,
we want to not just be in the top five
of the world's most reliable airlines.
We want to be in the top quartile
of the world's most resilient airlines.
Um, one example of that around turbulence is some
of the capability we've been developing around
what we call dynamic flight planning, the ability
to change flight plans dynamic dynamically while in flight,
um, to do things like optimize fuel burn based on
very localized weather patterns, uh, at altitude and
or as you point out, avoid turbulence,
which we expect to do more and more often.
Okay. I've got some other quite
separate questions, but you might
Have other people. Okay, well I'll
go to one and then I've got tangi and then,
and then I'll go back to you again.
Thank you. Um, just, um, one thing, the, the Q3 hundreds,
the, um, but this is going back
to regional connectivity as well.
Um, where are we at with, I know, um,
Greg was talking a lot last year about a renewed
relationship with the Canadians
in terms of parts, et cetera.
How's that looking and then what's the timeframe for those
and is there any more thinking around what, what's
beyond Q3 hundreds?
Because I mean, obviously for some airports in particular,
um, ATR don't kind of don't work.
So the board, uh, Greg's final, final leg of his role
as CEO, um, uh, Greg and the board
and Nicole, we went to Canada to visit.
Um, uh, the name's just gonna, in my head,
300 de Haviland de Haviland. Oh, I see.
I thought the owner's name. Yes,
Yes. De Haviland. Um,
uh,
and we had a really good session with them, um,
and we came away from that session, um, very comforted
that they are fully committed
and supporting the ongoing production
and maintenance of parts and et cetera for Q3 hundreds.
So that was an excellent session and,
and absolutely validated Greg's views, um,
that he'd had around Q3 hundreds.
The Q3 hundreds have still got quite a lot
of useful life left.
Um, I can't remember the exact year in, in the thirties
that we are anticipating, but it's quite some time away.
Um, they are really good aircraft Nuggety Richard might call
them, um, aircraft.
They are excellent aircraft
and very well suited to certain parts of New Zealand,
so we have no plans, um, to change that.
You've seen the beta aircraft trial that, um, uh,
we've just concluded the first sort of go at that.
There's still quite a while to go with that technology
before we get into that next phase.
So we will be starting to look at it.
We're in the middle of
international fleet renewal at the moment.
That's the focus, but we'll be continuing
to think about the Q3 hundreds in the next few years.
Nickel, was there anything you wanted to add to that?
Uh, no, except to say in some of the markets that are
starting to, um, justify us up gauging,
we're actively looking at that too.
So, sorry. So say, put it again, up, update meaning
to an from a QQ 300 to an A TR or an A TR to E jet.
Yeah. Um, so, uh, we are continually looking at,
because as Richard said, a larger aircraft is more economic.
So if the demand is there,
there's a natural bias towards moving
to higher gauge aircraft over
Time. That makes sense. Yeah.
And Just to, to be clear that when you say the 2030s,
um, 2030s is, you know, one end,
it's four years away, the other end it's 14.
That's quite a big difference, roughly when
It's later In the Thirties. So
yeah, so there's
heavy checks on the fleet in the late
twenties, just part of the normal maintenance profile.
And then it's sort of 2035 onwards. Okay.
So it's late. That's
Later Need to invest in a life extension on the fleet
if you were to keep it beyond the late thirties.
Okay. No, appreciate it.
Um, I had, think I had tangi next and then C and then Simon.
Yeah. And then, yeah. Thank you.
Um, I wanna ask about on-time performance metrics.
Um, the, the information that we've got in front of us sort
of indicates your, um, on-time performance, uh,
that identifies a sort of international short haul
as, as being the, the lowest.
Um, I'm not too sure if
that's a consistent trend it seems to be on, on this basis.
Um, but what about, that's all based on arrival times.
What about on time performance for marches?
What does that look like?
Uh, we, we keep an eye on both. They're both matter.
Uh, the, uh, the, the,
the reason the arrival time is the global
standard benchmark is
because that's what's in the airlines control mostly.
So as soon as you're off blocks, um, not withstanding sort
of tax delay in taxiing and, and,
and other potentially weather related issues like a
headwind, for example, by
and large, that's,
that's mostly in the airlines, uh, control.
So we, we, the industry focuses on making sure a 15,
uh, is the standard measure of, of, uh, on time,
uh, performance.
But we keep a very close eye on D zero as well.
And, um, sorry, go ahead.
I was just gonna say, keeping a close eye, do you have,
um, metrics or data that you can provide to the committee
around, uh, on time performance for departures?
I don't have D zero numbers here
with me, but something we can,
We Can provide them, we can
provide, we can provide them later.
Um, I think around D zero though, Nicole, it, uh, so,
'cause we do monitor both, we get 'em both
in our board packs, right?
Um, we have, we used to only really do D zero
and we've moved to a 15, is the aeronautical sort
of standard, but in terms of D zero, uh, nickel,
you might wanna explain what you've done
around the turnaround times, et cetera,
for the departure. Yes.
Uh, So it's that clean sheet review.
Exactly. Uh, I, I, I mean, is, uh, sort of DT alluded to,
uh, coming into the role, I've had to be clear about
what my priorities are for, so
that the organization is clear about what,
what our priorities are.
And my number one priority is safe, reliable,
and punctual operations.
Um, and so as part of that, we are being, uh,
and this is not new focus,
but given we've had the volatility around engine issues,
particularly, it's been a hard nut to crack for us.
Uh, but over the last few months we've been doing a lot
of work in this space as we are getting a bit more certainty
around, um, uh, what we call our line
of balance of aircraft.
So how many aircraft we actually have
available at any point in time.
Uh, we're also taking a bit more of a conservative view of
how many aircraft we have just
because, uh, of the fact that we, you know, the engine
challenges aren't something that's signaled a long way away.
So we have to be, uh, conservative,
which has a commercial impact of course,
but we think it's, you know, the fundamental commitment
that we make to our customers is that we leave on time,
arrive on time, and get your bags with you when you arrive.
Um, and so that's the,
that's been my number one
priority in the a hundred day plan.
And as part of that, we've been working on
what we call a clean sheet review.
Uh, and we've started that with the turboprops, uh,
'cause regional on time performance
cancellation has been a challenge.
And really what that means is, uh, moving to a world
of much more precision, uh, schedule design.
So there's a gate at Auckland Airport Gate 49,
which is a chronically problematic gate for us, uh,
on the regional network because our ground service equipment
don't have a thoroughfare
to move when aircraft are parked on, on the earlier gates.
Um, so planning for a turn time on that gate equivalent
to the turn time, uh, for, uh, Q 300 in,
in Gisborne wouldn't makes any sense, right?
In reality it's just they're different operating, uh,
parameters that are required.
So we've gone down to a fair level
of detail on airport by airport.
Uh, and over time we'll go to gate by gate across the board.
Um, and we've published that
and that schedule went live on the 1st of November.
Um, and so since the 1st of November, uh, till today,
our on time performance on the regional network's been 84%.
Um, that's almost a 10 points improvement, uh,
in on time performance.
Uh, over 10 points in fact,
which in the airline indu industry is almost unheard of.
Um, uh, controllable cancellation rates is down from,
uh, is down to 1.8% from 2.9%
during the same time last year.
Again, a huge improvement.
Uh, we ran that as a sort of experiment to begin with.
Um, but now we wanna standardize that not just across
regional, but also jet fleets, domestic and international.
Um, international, uh, is a little bit more complicated, uh,
trans tasman and beyond.
'cause we fly into some
of the most slot constrained airports in the world.
So making even five minute, 10 minute shifts in schedule,
uh, can be problematic.
And we can't afford, not just for Air New Zealand,
but for our customers and the country to lose some
of these critical slots in airports like Sydney
and LA and so on.
But nonetheless, we think there is huge opportunity
to improve on, in, in that, uh, area
by taking this much more
of a surgical approach to schedule design.
On top of that, we've built a lot of capability
for our teams on the ground.
So there's about 12 teams that execute almost 1200 tasks,
you know, uh, in the case of a domestic,
a three 20 in 30 minutes.
So that's like our pit stop, our Formula one pit stop
to turn the aircraft, uh, around.
And it's a very complex, uh, uh, set of tasks
that need to happen in as particular order
for us to be able to do that.
We've built a tool called Ops CoLab, which is a,
basically an asynchronous messaging tool
between all of these teams.
So in real time, everyone knows what everyone else is doing,
and so we can stay coordinated a lot more.
So the cleaning team can say, I finished 30 seconds earlier,
I'm gonna donate that time to you now, their,
their culinary team.
So to load up your, their food on in, into the galleys,
for example, or, you know, it's, it's sort of,
so everyone's got real time situational
awareness of what's going on.
That's helped us a lot.
That's given us a few points that
to four point increase in on time performance.
Um, and then there is a big cultural push, uh,
specifically in port in, in our hub airport in Auckland,
which is now a very large construction site.
Turning aircraft have just gotten a lot more complex and,
and airline like us, which relies
so heavily on a hub airport, um,
that hub airport going into a long-term construction mode
puts a lot of pressure on operation.
So a ton of focus is going into training, sort
of the culture around on time performance, uh,
but also never compromising on safety.
Hmm. Uh, 'cause when you are under pressure
and you're doing, you know, 60% of our 500, you know,
flights a day could sometimes fly through Auckland.
Uh, we wanna make sure each
of those turns are precise and safe.
Uh, so it's a big focus of ours.
We publish the jet schedule for first November, 2026.
Um, and that's
because it takes so long to sort of slot, uh,
lock down the slots and, you know, get the tickets published
and schedules published and so on.
Um, so both at that point, both our regional network
and our jet network will be operating with this new sort
of philosophy around or
So D zero D zero will, given all of
that work also start to improve.
We've seen improvements, but it will improve.
That's great. Thank, thank you for that.
Can I just ask, um, one sort of bug there in the past
has been about the lack of comps that New Zealand give
to customers Yes.
Around reasons for delays. Yes.
Um, and Sam knows this,
'cause I've, I've raised that with him previously,
but there seems to be improvement in, in that space.
I mean, I don't think people, uh, you know, need to know
that what specific nature
of an engineering issue is obviously safety.
This goal needs to be screw, that's, I wanna know that,
but, you know, is, has there been a conscious effort to try
and improve and lift the game?
Absolutely. So that, and if so, what's still yet to come?
Yeah, I mean, there's been two sides to the focus.
One, we've been building a capability called automated
passenger rebooking.
So on the domestic network, now, if you have a cancel, uh,
before you, you know, there, there's, there's,
there's this beautiful video in one of our lounges
where we've canceled a flight.
And so everyone, the default behavior is to stand up
and start walking towards our, uh, our desk.
And so we have three or four people who stand up
and in the next 30 seconds, a notification comes in saying,
you've already been rebooked onto your next flight.
And if it doesn't quite work for you,
here's three other options.
Right? So that automated passenger rebooking capability,
that's part of this investment in resiliency.
Um, 'cause we are disrupt management
businesses too at the end of the day.
Um, so there's been a bit of focus around that area
and that's been really good for,
for our domestic capability.
And we're now expanding that into international.
On the communication side, um, we are doing a lot more work
around, um, the tone and the content of our communication
and the timeliness of it.
Uh, so big focus around making sure
that we're a bit more transparent.
Big people wanna feel informed and in control.
And when there's a delay
or cancellation, you start to lose control.
It's a high anxiety experience.
We get that I'm a long-term gold elite myself who've lived
on our planes to earn a living.
So, you know, missing an important meeting
or, you know, this holiday
that you've been looking forward to.
These things are important to our customers of course.
So being able to just speak to them normally, um,
rather than this sort of almost vanilla
response that we get.
Um, to the extent that I know a lot of my own network
of colleagues and friends think when we say engineering
issues, it's sort of a euphemism for something else, right?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Um, and it's not of course, um,
but partly that's because somebody
Overslept, you mean?
Yeah. And it's the crew availability.
That's the crew availability. Sometimes you,
You'll have to say, We do say of course. Yeah. Yeah.
It's not, it's not perfect,
but it's absolutely improving, isn't it? Yeah.
In fact, on Monday I've got, uh,
the team working on it coming in to give us the next round
of updates on the work that's been done.
Can I just add, just if you think about all these weekends
or days in the last six to 12 months,
'cause Nichol's team built this a PR thing
where you just get your phone,
just tells you what's gonna happen next.
You don't need to stand up and walk to anywhere.
Remember those queues that used to go out of the airport?
If you think about it like 12, 24 months ago when one
of those things would happen, there'd always be an article
on the front page of, of the paper.
Well, you know, the website now,
but the paper, you know, that, that would say, oh, you know,
this person was stranded, this person didn't know what
to do, or it was all terrible.
You think about the last time you actually saw one of those,
you know, we could, we can clear how many hundreds
of thousands of people did we clear
over the last few weekends with this weather bomb?
Well, And I don't think we had one media article, like
that's how effective this tool that Nickko
and his team built is.
Now, it's not gonna be perfect for everyone of course,
but it's a disrupt at the end of the day.
But the fact we can get to
that position is probably why he is sitting
here next to me, actually.
Um, it's a, it's a very good thing. Yeah, it's good.
Must been something to do with the it systems was who,
who's looking after it before?
I dunno. Some guy.
Celia, thank you. Um, completely different track.
Um, one small one
and then if I'm allowed, um, a slightly larger one.
Um, the small one is the Wellington Airport, um,
runway safety improvements.
Are you doing any planning for potential
new, um, opportunities?
Or maybe you can't even tell us.
I don't know the answer to that.
What do you mean by new opportunities?
So, well they, um, as I understand it, they will be able
to take considerably, um, larger, larger planes, right? Oh,
I think that's, are we use, is this the runway extension?
No, no. It's a runway safety change runway
Actually. Richard, do you
Have the effect?
Yes. Right, right. Okay. I get Richard, do you know,
We've got no current plans to operate wide bodies,
for instance, into and out
of Wellington longer haul flights.
Right. Um, thank you.
Okay, that's fine. Um,
and the other question I had was, um,
the diversity and inclusion section, it seems
that your organization finds diversity
and inclusion, um, a good thing for business.
And I just wondered if there was anything
that you would like to add to that.
Well, I, I think like the key thing is that, you know,
we call ourselves in New Zealand, we are, you know, our,
our tagline at the moment is of New Zealand for New Zealand
and you know, it's our purpose and um, thanks,
See You later. Um,
and so we represent all New Zealanders and so diversity
and inclusion is incredibly important to us.
We take it really seriously at all levels, both from gender,
ethnicity, disability, any other sort of way.
So we have a special people and remuneration
and diversity committee
and we actually met for half a day yesterday.
And we look at how we are doing, we've got
so many beautiful networks within our airline that, that,
that nurture different groups and demographics
and we measure ourselves.
And so I would say that we are, um, we we're right up there
with New Zealand companies leading the way
on diversity and inclusion.
Very proud of that.
Good for you. Thank you Carlos then. So thank you.
Yes. I just wanna talk about the cadet program,
which launched in 2024.
Mm-hmm. I've been informed that the 30 cadet have
complete their training in us,
but when they appointed return, they are unable to register
as a pilot in New Zealand.
Can you give us a little bit more information on that?
I'm unable to, but somebody else might be able to.
Otherwise we'll come back to you,
To you.
I think we'll, we'll revert to you.
That doesn't sound right on the face of it.
And so I'd like to, 'cause we are, we are really enjoying
that program and,
and the people coming through to in New Zealand.
Let's come back to you with some detail on
It. The content is
because, um, US
and New Zealand using a different licensing system, right?
So when we finish the training us those cadet
aren't able to register.
So my next question is more like, want to ask you guys,
do you think the current New Zealand licensing
system still fit the purpose?
Yes. I, I hear your point.
It's, it's an excellent point to raise
and I'm very hopeful that is not the case
and we will come back to you with some information on that.
If it is the case, we'll be doing something about it.
Alright. So I've got another
question, just a very quick one.
You should able to give me the, the answer.
One of the highlight that we are in the Indian trial is
and Air India sign MOU Yes.
To export it direct, right? Yes.
So the was one of the highlight.
So can you give us a little bit update on this?
Oh, Well, are you passing it to me?
'cause I'm of Indian origin.
That was a cheap, that was a cheap,
Sorry.
No, I can speak to, uh, we, we, we are, um,
India is very much in the consideration set, particularly
as, uh, wide body engine issues get resolved
and we start to take more, um, deliveries
of brand new Boeing seven eight sevens.
We now, for the first time in a long time are
thrilled about the fact that we can think about
international growth.
Um, and we've got a very capable team
that is currently looking at the cost benefit analysis
and the timing of where we might deploy
some of that capacity.
Um, we are, we, we, we, we,
we have many options right on
the table that we are looking at.
Uh, and India is, is on the short list of options.
Uh, the way I would say is, um, uh, think about this is, uh,
I, I think from an a New Zealand, I,
any New Zealand's role in connecting New Zealand
and India, uh, it's a matter of when, not if.
Um, and, uh, it is one of the options
that is quite high up on that list for us right now.
Okay, Simon. Okay.
Just a s on the, um, cadets question, Mr.
Chin, I have a primary, um, what's your
Process for selecting cadets
for this training program in the us?
I couldn't answer that. I I ne
Neither could I, but I mean that's something
that we can Yeah, it'll be a
very specific selection criteria. So
I'm, I'm interested in the criteria
and I'm also interested in, um,
what benefits are available to the cadets.
Um, sure. As part of the scheme, I think we'll come
Back fulsome on the, That'd be great program
So that you've all got, we'll note
that if, if you can note that as
Yes. Okay,
Thanks.
So I have a primary question just come back
to sustainability in the environment.
Um, when, uh, you very kindly showed me around the, uh,
operation and the maintenance hangers, uh, uh,
I heard about an issue with historical contamination, uh,
at Auckland Airport relating to pfas
and some of these other three chemicals.
I mean, it's not an uncommon scenario.
It's not just all at airports mm-hmm. Um, around the world.
Um, and, and in New Zealand.
Um, so I'm interested in, uh, what strategies or, or,
or landing has in New Zealand come up with to manage, uh,
all of the materials that arose from that development.
I think Richard, you take on.
Yeah, so I think, um, we obviously hit two, two points.
Uh, the PAS issue, uh, reasonably well known
at the airport is a byproduct of fire retardant
used in the hangar system.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and fire rescue for a long time.
Um, we have now replaced all those systems
with compliance systems.
So we, we don't have an issue going forward. Okay.
It's obviously a legacy issue in the ground.
A a major portion of which we have now dealt with.
When we built the new hangar for Auckland Airport, uh,
we had to do some excavation work to build that hangar.
Uh, and we've taken appropriate measures to quarantine, uh,
the sort of PFAS contaminated soil, very low readings,
I must Okay.
Emphasize. Um, but we have processes, systems
and processes in place to make sure that, uh, we,
we deal with that appropriately.
And as I say, reiterate, our modern, uh,
EPO foam systems are all, uh, modern
and compliant or no future issues for us.
Well, that's very reassuring.
Just coming back to the material that's in quarantine, um,
it looked like quite a large stockpile of material there.
I'm, I'm assuming it's tens of thousands of cubic meters.
Um, tens of thousands of tons.
Have you got a final destination for
that material identified?
Don't, or is it still sitting there under plastic
Cars? No, we don't.
And in the current environment there are
relatively few, if any places that need to to take it.
Um, and so we are left with dealing with
that ourselves for the most part.
Well, I mean, the material sits on Auckland Airport land.
I mean, that's where it came from.
Has Auckland Airport, uh, come to the party in terms
of finding a long term solution for these materials?
I understand. I can't ask Simon other than to
note that the Auckland Airport
and New Zealand property teams
and, uh, work very closely with each other mm-hmm.
To identify, uh, issues, uh,
and work together on the most expeditious, uh, resolution.
Okay. Well it's sounds like a problem.
Um, jointly owned is jointly solved. Yep.
Okay. Agree. Dan, Uh, Dre, welcome
and nickel, good to see you.
Sorry I was, uh, late to this hearing.
Um, just wanna return to the conversation about, uh,
inflation of domestic air fees.
Um, so the latest quarterly numbers from December, uh,
international affairs rose quite a lot, which is expected,
it's a cyclical thing,
but there was also an uptick in domestic affairs.
Mm-hmm. I'm just keen to get a sense of whether, uh,
in New Zealand benchmarks,
average affairs against your competitors domestically
and what that might show in terms of inflation
for your competitors versus inflation for in New Zealand.
Yeah.
Yeah. Maybe I'll kick off and you can, um, oh,
You have, I'm sorry if I, if, if,
if I have covered ground, um, feel free
to say all the inflation
Bits have been covered, but the, but
but the benchmarking internationally hasn't,
So Yes. Uh,
sorry, you're talking about benchmarking
domestically or internationally?
Uh, well, I guess primarily domestically in terms
of Jetstar, but um, I guess of course international,
we also a big component of the latest inflation numbers
so we can understand that in terms cost living.
Yeah. Okay. Well, I mean, I think, um, that in terms
of our competitor being Jetstar on the main trunk in
New Zealand, which I think is
where you are mainly pointing at, um,
I think a couple of things there.
I think firstly we offer a different service.
So you, you get different services
and you pay different prices for different services as,
as a customer chooses.
I think secondly, we're not in control of
what a competitor might price
and, um, they're part
of a large organization based, um, out of New Zealand.
They'll make their decisions based on their strategies, um,
competitively and
otherwise, whether the prices
that they charge reflect the costs or
otherwise, uh, is not for us to determine.
Um, we are very, uh, you know, we are very, very careful
to keep costs for New Zealanders as low
as we possibly can within the cost structures within
which we operate.
Um, nickel has highlighted previously in the media that uh,
we continue to be disappointed by airports
that charge us differently, a premium
for being a national carrier.
Um, and you know, that's something that we, we think about.
Um, so there are a number of issues there,
but, um, we can't control a competitor's costing,
obviously it's relevant to us
and, uh, we will always take competitors into account
and we benchmark, but we are also,
we are really a demand driven
and supply driven organization.
So we run a dynamic model.
If this many people want
to fly here on this day at this time, that is something
that the model will understand and think about.
So if we price 'em correctly,
if we don't provide the right capacity, um,
the results will come out of that.
So, um, we're under enormous pressure from a cost
perspective in New Zealand.
Um, and that is just the reality for us.
It may or may not be the real reality for our competitors
and they may or may not be pricing in relation to that.
That's, that's just not something we can determine.
Okay. Um, so you're saying to me that you do benchmark,
um, uh, probably haven't asked, answered the question of
how does in New Zealand fear in that,
but I guess what you're saying is it's very difficult,
you're saying it's actually
quite difficult to, to determine,
Look, we, we make assessments of those things,
but, um, I think the point you're,
you're really pointing at is how come if it costs this much
to fly in New Zealand on this route
and fly, it costs this much on Jetstar
and it's far less than that.
How can that be? I, I guess that's the crux of the question.
Um, no, sorry if I can, um, articulate my question.
I get that. Yeah. Um, you in New Zealand and,
and other competitors follow different strategies.
Yes. Low cost versus differentiation. Yes. Yep.
But I'm looking for the relative increase in cost.
'cause I've just come from a meeting
with the governor about inflation and Yes.
That she raised the specific, uh, issue
around the inflation rate of domestic airfares.
Right. Um, and I think that is a very big concern Yes.
For New Zealanders. So yes.
I'm wondering how in New Zealand fears
against its competitors.
I mean, for example, I used to work at food stuff
and we benchmark against price baskets for
progressive enterprises and so forth.
I'm wondering if you do something similar, how that actually
Yeah. So the bit maybe on
inflation that we covered earlier was
that if you think about inflation over the last five
or six years, it's um, it, it's cumulatively
around 29%, 29%
our cost inflation across our base, many parts
of which are uncontrollable by us, so unable
to be managed in any particular way, um, is north of 40%.
What we've actually passed on to customers is roughly 32%.
So only a small margin over inflation
that is being experienced in New Zealand.
Remembering that a lot of things like charts
and, um, aircraft obviously come from offshore
and we have to pay whatever that price is at that time.
So, um, inflation is a significant
issue for us, not just New Zealand,
but offshore inflation, um,
and inflation specific to the aeronautical industry.
So all those things are massively important.
So we talked about that. The other area we talked about
were the aeronautical system costs in New Zealand,
which have, they are way past 40%, um,
roughly the
Same period. The landing charges
have inflated 80%.
80%. Now if we put that onto people's airfares,
you'd be sitting here asking me about that.
Mm-hmm. So we can't, but we have to absorb those costs
'cause we have no, no real choice in the matter.
So these are the issues we're dealing with.
Now, if our competitors aren't subject
to the same cost from the same airports,
we don't know about that.
We can only, um, deal with what's in front
of us under the regulatory system
and settings. Okay, thank you.
Uh, a couple of questions from me.
Um, just leave freight, Richard.
Um, there's, I've had, I've had particularly from the,
well not particularly from the south island,
there's a lot more freight capacity going out
of the north island internationally than there
is from the South Island.
Now I'm guessing that there's probably not a huge difference
between this, you know, the, the, the high value, um,
product that needs to get to market quickly, uh,
in the south as there is in the north, there might look,
there might be a difference, might actually more in the
south than there is in for line.
Right. Um, but if there's not enough freight capacity coming
outta the south, that means
that's actually quite an impediment.
And that's what I'm hearing from a number of, um, areas.
There's quite an impediment to economic
activity in the south island and also to export revenue.
Yeah. So can, you can share just any, any thoughts on that
and whether that's sold, I mean effectively for you
that means that would mean if it was solved it would be more
widely out, out of Christchurch, um,
to sort of compensate for that.
But yeah, be interested in your thoughts on it
Without going into too much detail.
'cause we haven't really finalized our plans as yet.
As I was explaining around what we do
with the wide body capacity that we start to accumulate now
that the engine issue starts resolve themselves over the
next 12, 18 months
and we start getting that, those five new 7, 8, 7 aircraft,
um, we are, uh,
looking at increasing freight capacity out
of the south island as one of the options.
Well, can I encourage you
to think about that and what the economic
We are thinking about it very seriously.
Very good. Yeah. Excellent. Okay, cool. Good.
I'll be keen to see products.
Um, the second one is just arrow costs.
Um, so I'll be really good
to just hear a little more about those arrow costs.
Then you said plus 80% foot,
that's landing charges across the board as
that first seat bill, what, whatever it is,
but how those are looking.
But also we've got, um, uh, uh, civil, um,
aviation in, in a few minutes time.
Um, and obviously their prices have gone up. So
Civil Aviation Authority have said all
of those charges have increased.
Um, and again, outstripped inflation.
So, um, again, we are faced with costs
that we can't fully pass on to New Zealanders
because, um, the demand would not
be there at that price point.
So, you know, we, we, we, we, that's a struggle for us.
I think the more, the larger issue in the room are landing
phase in particularly at Cland Airport, um, uh, those,
while Nickel has just given you a number for
what we've experienced in the last,
Since 2019. Yeah.
So in that last period, we were talking about inflation,
uh, it will increase year on year from here.
So how that's, that's
80% to here. Yeah. And
Then it'll be, and then year on year increments, um,
as the redevelopment occurs.
So how we, how we deal with that, uh,
you know, that's, that's something coming at us.
How do you deal with that? Because the
Numbers we seek, we seek regulatory relief is what we do
because, um, you know, I, I,
I think this is a conversation well known
to the political system mm-hmm.
In New Zealand. Um, we need a wonderful fit
for purpose entry airport into New Zealand.
And I think, uh,
redevelopment at Auckland Airport is absolutely necessary.
And, um, and, and we support that.
Uh, but, uh, there's, there's a limit
like all infrastructure.
It's, it's, there's a limit to
what New Zealanders can pay for.
And c can I I I, I think the, the, the,
for the committee to think about this, it, I, I think
that there are two issues and both equally troubling for us.
And, you know, we, this is something that publicly we have,
we have stated the, the first is parity.
Making sure that in New Zealand, um, is,
is paying what competitors are paying.
Mm-hmm. Uh, I think is important, uh, given the density
of the network and the frequency of flights we cover.
Otherwise, it creates sort of a perverse outcome, uh, in,
in, in the, in the sort of short to medium term
and into the long term.
Uh, and two is the absolute cost.
Um, and the way I think about the absolute cost is that, uh,
if you look at this through the lens of tourism, um,
we are competing with the world to attract
high quality tourists into the country.
And so benchmarking our costs
versus our most, uh, closest competitors fighting for
tourism footfall, uh, would be a good way
of thinking about this challenge.
Um, the other way we think about this is, you know,
whether or not, um, landing charges is a percentage
of revenue for us is within the ballpark of what
our compete, uh, our competitor airlines
around the world pay, uh, at their hub airports.
Is it, uh, no,
it's very quickly becoming one of the most expensive.
Um, just, um, on those issues, I mean,
if you wanna expand on regulatory relief, what you're,
what you're aspiring to,
and I know that there's various different, um, inquiries
that you are, uh, would like, just on the,
on the differential pricing, is that something
that ComCom has been encouraged to look at?
Because obviously they, they set wac, they, you know, um,
the, the,
The, the wacs really related to the redevelopment piece
that the, the, and separate to that there are,
you know, which, which are connected.
But the, the lending that the, the charges
that an airport will negotiate with an airline, um,
we don't have full visibility of those.
And should the ComCom look at those?
I mean, I think that's a question, Richard. I dunno. Yeah.
No, I think we haven't asked. No,
the ComCom hasn't looked at that.
There's a, they have, they haven't, they haven't knowledge.
Um, there's a published tariff, uh,
for the major airports out there that is, uh, to raise
and Nicole note, um, you know,
any differences that airlines pay
between the published tariff and what they, uh,
Sort of charged, uh,
With, uh, we have no visibility of,
we assume everybody pays the published tariff,
but, uh, we dunno that for sure, but
We assume, but you know, that's not true.
Okay. Yeah. Cool. Clarify.
Sorry, I think we're at, we're at time.
So one last question. It's
Just a clarification on that last point.
Can I ask the Last question so we can assume that
because you've raised the parity issue? Yes. Thank
Last Question. This finish on,
I was very quick.
Um, let's finish on high, high notes.
Can you talk about the battery electric aircraft?
Oh, Look, I've, I've, I've, I've seen one, I've been
to the factory in the us but, um, Nicole
and Cur, you've been involved with it here. We, we
Had a fairly successful technical demonstration period
that ran both out of Hamilton Airport and Wellington mm-hmm.
And Blenheim. Um,
and, uh, really what we are trying to do is two things.
One, uh, invite innovation to our shores, uh, so
that we are not necessarily disrupted by it,
but we are part of creating
what the future aviation system could look like.
And I think the New Zealand aviation system is world
renowned for being ahead of the curve,
and this is just this
generation's contribution to that legacy.
Um, the, the second thing is, um,
it's unclear whether that's the aircraft that's part, part
of our solution or not.
It's far too early to to, to make a call on such things.
But really what we're trying to do is to understand
in a true operational sense, um, what the impact of
electric aviation could look like,
and what type of infrastructure would we need,
what rule settings would be required,
what would training programs look like, what sort
of maintenance organization we wanna
build, and so on and so forth.
So, uh, it's really about, uh,
uh, it, it's been an exercise of, uh, experimentation
and learning, um, at and
because we've made ourselves sort of available to,
to the manufacturer at a very reasonable cost.
So the, the cost benefit analysis for us
and the country, uh, is, is,
is very strong on that, on that basis.
Um, but what exactly happens with that aircraft, Carl?
It's hard to tell. It goes back now to factory and,
and they continue to do some r and d work,
But you're right, it's exciting. Yeah.
It's, Thank you very much.
Our time, sadly is, is, um, up, um,
we really appreciate you coming in again.
Uh, I think it's been very, very useful.
Our normal processes that we will, um,
if there are further follow up questions Yep.
Um, we will get those to you colleagues.
We're gonna have to do that fairly quickly in terms
of getting us getting 'em to you
and then you getting them back in terms
of the reporting timeframe that we've got.
Um, so we will, um, we'll set some deadlines
and, um, communicate that.
How will that tie in with, um, your request
to hear a bit more when they can be more open about some
of the financial results?
Uh, moving
The calendar, I mean, you know, basically March and April.
Thank you very much. Would be a window.
Yeah. So, so, um, I think we won't be able,
some things we won't be able to get in time for.
We've, we, we've got a report back
to the house on the annual review by 31st of March.
Yeah. Um, so, but it means also, you know,
actually writing the report and Yeah.
Team writing a report and us considering the report.
So, um, so, so far we can go before we actually go.
We actually need to close that off and Okay.
And do the job. But thank you. Well,
As you wish, um, and o see on St. Patrick's
Day. Yeah. We look forward to seeing you soon.
Coming green. Oh
Yeah, I'll green. Oh,
very good. Thanks team. So we part of your,
Oh, well, I know, I know which party is.
Thank you. Thanks guys.
Right. Darren James team. Um, welcome.
Good to have you here. Um,
what we'll do is our usual process.
We've only got half an hour.
Sorry, we're running a little bit late.
We've just, some of the questions we have
for in New Zealand, we could probably could kept it
for another hour or so, but, you know,
that's the way life life works.
Um, so we've only got half an hour, um,
'cause we had a decent, decent, uh, go last time.
Um, but, um, if you wanna take a few minutes to do an intro
of any key issues and then, um, we'll get to questions.
Thanks Mr. Chair. Um, so yeah, thank you.
And I, I do acknowledge that, um, Mr.
Chair, that, um, the restriction on time.
So we had some other stuff that we wanted to cover off,
but we thought we'd really open up for questions today.
So just firstly, um, thank you for the opportunity, um,
to you and the select committee members, uh, for, um,
having us today and,
and the opportunity to, um,
talk about Airways performance financial year 25.
Any other matters that you want to cover off today?
Uh, just initially I'd just like you, you're aware,
James Young is our chief executive.
Um, just behind me is Jamie Gray, who's head of our people
and, and partnerships, um,
and Fiona Schein,
who's our general council company secretary,
and to the left of James's, Ben Gerard,
who's our general manager, air Traffic Services.
We brought Ben out today
because sometimes there's some really
good technical questions.
Um, and he's very much on our frontline, our core business.
So, but I'm sure James and I are about to cover that all
Sounds like you keeping him the holes.
We've exactly a
We we'll, we'll keep him under control.
So, yeah. So, um, and,
and the other thing I just want to acknowledge, um, um,
flock to c Chung and yourself, um, Mr.
Chair was your visit in August
to our campus in Christchurch.
Thank you. Um, the feedback from our
team was really interesting.
Like they enjoyed the questioning
and they enjoyed the opportunity to, to showcase a,
the airways, our core business
and what we do on a day-to-day basis.
And then also as we, we, as we say, build once, use twice,
where then we commercialize what we do
for us on a day-to-day basis and take it to the world.
Um, and that's, we are seeing that as a real opportunity.
And, and there's some areas in particular that, um, uh,
are very strong for us
and we'll probably cover some of those today.
Um, just some comments from me, um, as chair,
I've been in the role since, uh, one November,
but I just wanted to make comment.
Um, and a big thanks.
Denise Church, who was our outgoing chair.
Uh, Denise was, um, in charge over this period
and, uh, her leadership through COVID
and the organization has certainly left an
impressive mark on the business.
I just wanted to acknowledge her today
in front of the select committee.
Good. And also Mark Hutchinson, who ended his tenure
as well on the 31st of October, around their, uh,
contribution to this period of time, um,
from a board perspective.
And, and James will talk a wee bit more
around the organization and its performance, et cetera.
Um, but from a board perspective, you know, like our,
our number one focus continues to be very much around safe,
secure, and sustainable operating environment.
Um, and, and that's what, what steps us apart, I think from,
you know, organizations globally and,
and things like how over COVID, we decided to maintain our,
our air traffic cohort and has put us in a good ability.
We're attacked globally, uh, for our staff,
which is a good thing, um, um, and a bad thing.
Um, it just shows the quality of our people.
Um, and that's, uh, another key component,
an investment in the organization around our leadership
and development capabilities within the organization.
Another key factor, um,
the board has very been focused on is our resilience.
Um, we're in the change of, of changing weather patterns,
um, and climate adaptation, um, and resilience
and what we do every day, our resilience around our people,
the resilience around our infrastructure.
Um, and, and this is a critical focus for us.
Um, the other thing is really important for us
as our ongoing stakeholder relationship
and partnership collaboration.
The aviation ecosystem as I call it, is a,
is is, is an interesting one.
So you've had in New Zealand
and here this morning, we are part of
that got repertory authorities, other operators,
everyone from ga and then we've all got this emerging
technology that's on the, on the doorstep as well
and what that means for our business
and how the ecosystem can actually generate that
for the benefit of New Zealand and also global opportunity.
Um, I think that's really all I want, really wanted
to cover off in a, in a very quick window, very conscious
of time, but I just want to acknowledge again, thank you
for the opportunity and we look forward
to covering off your questions today.
Thanks, Darren. James. Um, look,
j just a couple of comments from me.
Um, j just really building on the comment Darren made
around safety mean that as our primary reason for being, um,
we we've continued to operate.
We get a very proud, uh, legacy around safety
and we continue to build on that.
Uh, the operating performance for the company over the past,
uh, year was, was really strong.
We have delivered services at
or above, uh, those published our, in our service framework.
Um, our financial performance remains solid, acknowledging
that the aviation industry is continuing to recover.
Um, uh, we are focused on capital cost management, uh,
but we did, um, uh, we, we booked a profit of 11.9 million
after tax and paid a dividend
to the last matchy of $10 million.
Uh, looking forward, you know, we're committed
to delivering on our strategy and our,
and our 10 year, uh, plan.
Uh, with that is continued investment in people, systems
and infrastructure to enhance safety
as well as system resilience.
Uh, we've got projects ongoing at the moment that,
that modernize navigation surveillance across the country.
Uh, you're aware that we are, uh,
building a new air traffic control tower in Auckland.
We're also looking at a range of different, uh, uh,
digital technology that can be deployed into the system.
Uh, one key focus that we have at the moment is, is Milford.
Our services are delivered into Milford physically.
Uh, and we're looking at how we can do that virtually,
hopefully by the end of this year.
Airways, uh, collaborates on the aviation, uh, council with,
with, um, other participants in the industry.
We are also focused on the delivery
of the Aviation Action Plan.
Uh, within that we have some specific actions
to review our service framework, um,
as well as pricing framework.
We also have, um, a, a critical focus on deepening
partnerships, um, offshore with, with critical suppliers
and other, uh, equivalent a NSPs Airways is, is both.
Um, we, we receive services from offshore,
but we also deliver services offshore.
Uh, late last year we signed a partnership agreement with,
uh, air Services in Australia to the equivalent, uh,
looking at how we can collaborate
and leverage, um, the strengths
and skills of both organizations.
Probably just a final point for me is
around drone management and,
and how we safely innovate that.
That's the first into the aviation, uh, system,
and we are working with the ministry
and Civil Aviation Authority on that.
Uh, with that, Tom, look forward to the questions.
Um, I'll go to Celia,
and if you don't ask about drones, then I will.
Thank you. No, I'm, I, I have a couple
of quite different questions, so, okay.
Um, if there's really, I was interested,
and it comes from, um, a question of my colleague, um, Dr.
Carlos Chung earlier.
Um, what input does Airways have into the
Civil aviation authority?
Thinking about licensing of pilots in particular,
and whether it would be more productive for our country
to align with other larger jurisdictions
and, um, pilot licensing.
Do you have any input into that or,
Uh, should we Ask? We'll ask them.
Yeah, I mean, we're very connected
and with the Civil Aviation Authority, uh,
we're also familiar with how other jurisdictions, uh,
are operating and manage drones. Um, no,
No, not drone pilot. This is
pilot. Pilot, pilot. Pilot. I'm sorry.
No, he's the drone man.
I'm, I'm interested in drones too, but yeah. Yeah.
So look, just generally pilot licensing, you know, the,
we don't have a part to play in that.
Um, we are also required licenses
for air traffic controllers.
Yeah. So we are on the same kind of situations in
New Zealand. Are those different from
other,
very different from other countries?
And do you think it's justifiable that they're so different?
Ultimately, we all kind of connect into the international
civil aviation organization.
So they set the standard globally,
and then each state is required to deliver
what IKO simplify globally.
And then we, we, we, we, we right size it
for our, our size of country.
So basically across the world, there's similarities.
There may be some small changes
or adaptations that each country does in that space,
but fundamentally, the same rules that apply
to the UK apply to New Zealand.
So, and do, following on from that, do you have,
let's not focus on the pilot so much as your, your staff
that need, um, those qualifications.
Um, do you have any shortages?
Would it be easier if there was more alignment
between those, um, certificates from other countries that
where we might want to encourage immigration?
You happy if I carry that?
Yeah, so, so I think, I think the critical thing there is
that, um, from a licensing perspective,
as I said in my intro, we have been under attack globally
for our air traffic controllers.
Mm-hmm. So our controllers could go work in other countries
and they'll just be their, their qualification is, is,
is accepted, but has to be accepted under their local rules.
So, so that's the idea of IKO is
that you can cross reference your, your qualification
and then there'll be just some checks
and balances in that space to actually make sure
that you are a, a, a fit
and proper person. There'd be a fit and proper
You. So it works. Yeah, it works both
ways.
It's easier, it does to go as well as easier to come. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Carlos is gonna take over the
Brain question. Yes.
I think I asked the question
during the visit last time.
So how would be increasing drum operation influence the
safety and regulat space?
The, the increase of drone operations? Yes.
Um, so, so Airways does have a system
where drone operators are required to log their flights, um,
particularly around controlled airspace.
Uh, we have seen uplift in drone activity.
I don't have the exact number,
but it's, it's, you know, it,
it is steadily increasing over time.
Um, so we are,
and we are also looking at, uh, new technology
that can be deployed that that's more active in,
in identification of those drones.
Uh, but it's certainly an area that we need
to continue investing into.
So what do you think how,
how they could be define the future
of air traffic management?
Because when we see in other country, a lot
of drones being used for, um, you know, uber delivery.
Mm. Um, you can see it, the, the, the traffic in the,
in the air space will be more frequent now.
So how, how did we define the future
of air traffic management?
So we, we had the traditional users of the system,
commercial operators, general aviation.
We also have space, um, travel, um,
but also unmanned unpro aircraft and drones.
So the, what we are looking at doing is, is coming up with,
with systems and tools to integrate the entire ecosystem.
So you have, uh, air traffic management
and un crewed traffic management integrated, that
that's the safest way, uh,
to operate the airspace. Just on, on
Drones from Me is the other regulations.
I know the last time we talked or time
before that, possibly, um,
you were thinking about the regulations
and whether the, the regulations are actually doing
what they need to do to allow you
to manage those properly. Yeah.
Uh, so that is, that is a current conversation with the
regulator around how we do manage the system.
Part of that is, is regulation and, and,
and, uh, registration of drone users.
So who's the regulator in this instance?
The civil aviation project.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Right. Yeah, that's what I thought.
Um, okay. Right.
Um, so the question I wanted to know was, it was about the,
the, um, uh, the revenue commercializing revenue overseas.
I can't remember the exact percentage of your revenue,
which is, um, you know, derived outside New Zealand.
Obviously we like exports and then effectively as an export.
So, um, the more you can do it, but the better.
How's that going? What are the
opportunities looking like? And,
Um, look, it's going well.
I mean, typically it's, it, the offshore component accounts
to maybe six to $8 million of the, of the bottom line.
And we, we will to grow that over time.
We have, uh, commercial trading relationships with
That. That's revenue,
That, that's profit, profit, uh, revenue is between 40
to 45 million depending on the year.
Um, and we have trading relationships
with about 60 partner countries, um, around the world.
Uh, at, at the moment, there is a global shortage of, uh,
air traffic controllers.
So there's actually quite high demand, um,
for the EWA services, whether they be around training
or related services like simulation or selection tools.
Uh, and we are involved in quite a number
of conversations currently to grow that
Business. So a lot of it's
around the education side
of building up skills in other, in other areas as opposed
to direct technology.
Uh, yeah. So it's mainly around the training services.
We, we've got simulators that we,
we sell into other countries.
We have, uh, particular training, software
and selection tools that we deploy remotely.
Uh, we have, uh, capability, uh, in,
in au information and design.
Um, so for example, we,
we designed the third runway in
Hong Kong, uh, quite recently.
So there's, there's a number of services that we, we offer
and we do sell around the world.
And just final one from me,
and then I've got Tracy on that, on that score.
Uh, just for completeness, just so the development
of things like software
and simulation, things like that, is
that done in New Zealand, or is that
It is, yes. That's great.
Who, so who does that? Uh,
who else does it? There's a number of that.
Oh, no. I mean, you who obviously there a number of firms,
I'm presuming that you don't necessarily do it all in house,
but there are a number of firms
that you're working with who developed.
We do a lot inhouse. Yeah.
We have worked with, um, partner and I forget the name now,
but, um, but most of it is developed in house.
Yeah. Actually including software development.
Yeah. Well done. Very good. Excellent. Oh, sorry.
So Tracy, Tracy, Tracy.
Um, I just wanted to just expand on that slightly.
Obviously the commercial subi, um,
is an important growth area.
So how are you ensuring that that expansion doesn't divert,
um, uh, capital, uh, management focus,
any kind of, um, other capacity, um, away from,
or risk tolerance even away from, um,
what is your other important focus, um, on safety?
So, I mean, the primary focus is on our
core services in New Zealand.
Um, the, the commercial business is kind of,
has been spawned out of, um, the core
probably going back 20 plus years.
Um, in the commercial business, the services
that are offered, uh, those services
that are critically needed by the, by, um, airways group,
you know, the, the, the, the primary focus of, of airways.
Um, so to that extent we do have quite clear separation.
It's a, it's a separate independent
company, separate management.
Um, and it doesn't distract from the
core operations of airways. And
You've got a, a mechanism by which
to be would to showed that. Yep.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks, Julie. Um, thank you. No,
I, I switched. That's
fine. Because he hadn't had a primary yet.
Uh, last year. There was an incident that, um,
was fairly public in, in August related to the oceanic
air traffic control outage.
Um, there's a process that airways went through.
There was some recommendations.
Are you comfortable, a lot of it seems
to be in the comms space, but, um, are you comfortable
that progress has been made to ensure
that something like that's not repeated again?
I am. Um, and it is very, very rare for
that kind of thing to occur.
It has never happened previously, um, in,
in the life of that system.
Um, we did take the time to thoroughly
investigate what happened.
Um, there were eight actions
that came off the back of that investigation.
Um, as you point out some of those related
to communications, but both within the company as well as
outside of the company, there was, there was some, uh,
related to procedures that could be improved.
And there was a couple related
to the software side of things.
Um, of those eight, seven have now been closed out.
Um, there's one that remains, and that,
and that's, um, pending, updated, uh, publications.
So it's more or less addressed.
It's just waiting an update for publication.
But, you know, we, we do take this,
it is unfortunate it happened, um,
but we have taken the time to thoroughly investigate and,
and take those learnings and apply 'em back forward.
So, so we don't have a repeat.
Good. Um, just in terms of the,
the final one that's outstanding.
What do you mean about awaiting publication?
It, it, it, it's, it's a change
of a communication protocol.
There is awaiting a publication update.
Um, and, and that which comes out midyear,
I believe is the A-I-P-A-I-P has a cycle, uh, of, uh,
when it is published.
So it was in reference to, uh, phone lines, um, that, uh,
people could access directly, uh,
directly at the, uh, control position.
And now there's another phone line that's been created
that's not, uh, going to the, uh, control position to, um,
disturb the controller while, uh, they're doing the duties.
And, and this is awaiting, uh, publication
of the A IP, which is on a cycle,
Which then goes out to the users.
So, so it's a, it, it's been points out the, um, there,
there's a new phone line that's been created
and which, which then is published
and that publication goes out to all the users.
But the publication happens. Is it once a year? Every
56 days or something like that? Right.
Okay. So it's a timing issue. Six days shorter. Okay.
Time issue. What
I'm gonna do, um, colleagues, is I'm gonna go five minutes
longer or five minutes overtime this time
'cause we're five minutes overtime with New Zealand.
So just to make sure we're not short changing
Anyone. Celia,
Thank you very much.
Um, yes, I had two questions.
Um, separate one just to the break possibly, um,
for your safety work
and your informing, um, all of the people using the I face
of risks and so on, to
what extent do you rely on information from
what will now become the Earth Sciences Institute
and to what, um, drive that, um,
particularly weather related information yourselves
and related to that are to what extent of being
that increasing danger of turbulence and so, and,
and there's some comments about
what it means for your business. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Um, So we, we take, uh,
met data feeds into, into our systems so that, so that is
that, that processed, um, and, and, and communicate it out.
Um, uh, in terms of technical details,
I'm not sure we can get into it, but, but, um, but,
but we do receive MET data and that,
and that's what we communicate back out as part of our, um,
our service in terms of turbulence.
There, there is more.
We do, we're aware of more tur turbulence, um,
and, you know, wind patterns are also changing
as a result of climate change.
Um, so that is an impact,
that is an impact on the aviation system.
Thank you. And the other com very local question.
Um, you mentioned some, um, work on the Auckland runways.
Um, do you have any comments on the, um,
Wellington runway enhancements that have been, and,
and what is, at what point do they get certified
or not certified for larger, um, aircraft?
Um, yeah, so I mean,
last year Wellington Report consulted on the implementation,
the implementation of new safety, uh, measure
or, um, uh, called an eMASS system.
And that's been deployed at either end of the runway, um,
that, that project is currently underway.
Um, um, EWAS is supporting well airport
because then the navigation systems need to be moved.
Um, so we are working in, in close, um, uh,
working closely on the project
and in collaboration the local company.
So will there be a point when it finished that you have to
certify what aircraft or
What, what, whatever it is, what the criteria?
My understanding is the impact of the new system will allow,
uh, wide bodies to, to be able to,
um, come into the airport. Mm-hmm.
And do, do you have to say
that they can all hunt? Is that your role
Or We are not certify, no.
So the area that we're talking about there is
what we call a runway in safety area.
Yes. And James talk about the eMASS,
which has being extended on Wellington Runway,
that'll get Wellington Airport a greater operating length.
And then ultimately it'll be a decision that they'll,
they'll probably be doing a safety case on that,
which will then Wellington Airport will be, um,
to do a safety case, which will then confirm what type
of operating aircraft they can have.
So I think, as James said, they're hoping
to probably look at, you know, um,
twin engine wide body aircraft, like 8 3 50.
I know they are, I used to be on the board of Yep.
What I'm interested in is
what role your organization, our role
In that all's been is to support the upgrade
of the navigational equipment to do
that. And that's it. And
Thank you. Um, thank
you. Couple of questions from me.
Um, just the, the Aviation Council, which you bolt
touched on that briefly, just how's that going in your
Perspective? Yeah, it's, I mean,
I think we we're now a permanent,
um, form of our council.
Um, I think it, I think it's going well.
I mean, it's, it's an opportunity for the,
the main players within the industry to get together and,
and talk about the key issues and then,
and then more importantly, how we sort of work through
and resolves some of these particular issues.
I think, um, the, the aviation action plan is,
is a clear focus, um, within that Airways has,
has a specific role and responsibility to play,
but, um, I think it's going well so far.
So any key things that you would highlight in terms of,
um, areas of action that have come?
I mean, they are set out in the plan.
I mean there, there's, there is a specific focus on, um,
staffing and, and ensuring that we've got, um, the right i,
I guess skills and capabilities coming through the system.
Um, you know, there, there is a global shortage of pilots
and, and, and critical technicians, uh, as well
as air traffic controllers.
So I think, you know, seeing staffing is, is really a focus
and just ensuring that we've got people coming
through the system, uh, to meet,
to meet the needs of the future.
I wasn't gonna ask this, but seeing you highlighted
that particular one, um, just, uh, the, the,
it's been an issue of with shortage of pilots, engineers
who you mentioned ear traffic controllers, um,
across the board, the education system
and the way it's set up, um, you know, goes
through everything of around Yeah.
Student arrangements and everything.
So you're looking at encouraging some changes there,
which obviously go outside of aviation,
but would require the, uh, involvement of other parts
of the system like education.
Yeah, I mean, one, one of the issues, um, I I think
to be in the traffic controller is,
is you can't obtain a license until you're 21 years of age.
Mm-hmm. Um, and what one of the, that's one of the issues
that we're in discussion with the CAA, um, on is looking
to drop the age to 18, which then allows you to tap into,
um, school leavers, um, which, which, which makes sense.
So, so that's one particular issue,
but, um, I, I guess more broadly, um, chair, we,
we took a decision three years ago to try
and get ahead of the staffing requirements for the company.
Um, so, you know, on the back of COVID
and sort of, I guess pending, um, a retirement bubble,
but also the prospect of losing a, a number
of people offshore, we, we took the decision
to get ahead of the curve Yeah.
And take on more people than, than
what we needing at that time.
Yeah. Okay. Cool. Um,
and just the other one, um, the, the process you went
through with, um, setting charges, um, obviously, you know,
um, you started at one level, which I can't remember
what it was, and you ended up at 17
ish percent for the next three years. Yeah,
We, we consulted initially at 22 point, uh, 8% I think.
Um, and post con, um, consultation, we settled at 17.7,
um, percent, that's over three year period.
Yeah. Um, and,
and that does reflect some catch up inflation that,
that crept in from the previous price path.
That also captures the inflation effects
in the current price period.
But, but really importantly, it's critical investment
and safety and infrastructure that's needed for
The future. So what was
the previous, um,
the previous one then? Was it quite large?
The previous one? Uh, getting in this, um,
probably in the, in the 12 to 15%, we, we did actually
under recover on revenue, the idea being
to support the aviation system to recover at that time.
So we collected less revenue, um, than
what was required per our price part or per our framework.
Um, and I know that the process you've gone through sort
of described as being like the process that ComCom goes
through, but without ComCom sitting there to go
and to provide that, um, uh,
independent discipline, um, would it be helpful if they were
helping you with the process?
We, we, I mean we adopt a regulated framework.
We are not actually regulated, but,
but all the principal, that's the question.
All that framework, um, we, we adopt, um, there,
there is a cost to regulation as well.
Mm-hmm. Which is not insignificant.
Um, but, but actually the, the review
of the pricing framework is one of the actions that, um,
on airways as part of the aviation action plan.
Um, and that will no doubt go through next, early next year.
Okay. Cool. Any other questions?
I don't see any, so thank you very much.
I really appreciate that. What we may do,
there may be some follow up questions which
we will we'll send in writing.
There'll be quite, quite a quick turnaround for those both
for us to get them to you and for you, uh, to ask you
to get them back because, um, we've got a report back
to the house by 31 March
and that she's obviously gotta write the reports already
written and considered and so on.
So, but thank you very much. I really appreciate it. Cheer.
Thank you. Thank you. As we change over,
do we have the civil aviation authority that we as well?
We've done that. We did that
before last, thank you very much.
I'm trying to remember. It's a long time ago
or somebody lemme know when, when.